"How Optimism Works" section (#325)
ethereum-optimism/community-hub: src/docs/how-optimism-works/README.md

Optimism is as close to Ethereum as possible not only for pragmatic reasons, but because Optimism exists so that Ethereum can succeed.
We hope that you can see the influence of this philosophy when looking at Optimism's design.

## Rollup Protocol

We've covered most of the "why" behind Optimism.
Now it's time to explain the big idea that makes Optimism possible: the Optimistic Rollup.
We'll go through a brief explainer of *how* Optimistic Rollups work at a high level.
Then we'll explain *why* Optimism is built as an Optimistic Rollup and why we believe it's the best option for a system that addresses all of our design goals.

### Optimistic Rollups TL;DR

Optimism is an "Optimistic Rollup," which is basically just a fancy way of describing a blockchain that piggy-backs off of the security of another "parent" blockchain.
Specifically, Optimistic Rollups take advantage of the consensus mechanism (like PoW or PoS) of their parent chain instead of providing their own.
In Optimism's case this parent blockchain is Ethereum.

<div align="center">
<img width="400" src="../../assets/docs/how-optimism-works/1.png">
</div>

### Fault proofs

> In Optimistic rollups state changes are considered pending for a period of time, called the "challenge window".  If a proposed state change goes unchallenged for the duration of the challenge window (currently set to 7 days), then it is considered final.

Author: I think the framing here may reinforce the misconception that transactions/state can be rolled back. I'm going to see how I can rephrase it to avoid this.

---
title: How Optimism Works
lang: en-US
---

# {{ $frontmatter.title }}

## Introduction

Hello!
By the time you've finished reading this page you should have a foundational understanding of how Optimism makes Ethereum transactions cheaper and faster, the approach that Optimism is taking to scaling both Ethereum and Ethereum's values, and why Optimism is the best place to build your next Ethereum-native app.

We've tried to make this guide as comprehensive as possible while still keeping the content accessible to most readers.
Some content on this page is geared towards readers with a technical background but should still be legible to those with a basic understanding of how blockchains work.
Generally speaking, we err on the side of simplicity and approachability.

> Readers interested in a low-level look into Optimism under the hood should refer to the [Protocol](http://localhost:8080/docs/protocol/) section of this website.

Reviewer: You can do relative pathing with markdown. Should be something like `../protocol/README.md`

> Readers interested in a low-level look into Optimism under the hood should refer to the [Protocol](http://localhost:8080/docs/protocol/) section of this website.

Author: Oops!

Optimism is as close to Ethereum as possible not only for pragmatic reasons, but because Optimism exists so that Ethereum can succeed.
We hope that you can see the influence of this philosophy when looking at Optimism's design.

## System overview

We've covered most of the "why" behind Optimism.
Now it's time to explain the big idea that makes Optimism possible: the Optimistic Rollup.
We'll go through a brief explainer of *how* Optimistic Rollups work at a high level.
Then we'll explain *why* Optimism is built as an Optimistic Rollup and why we believe it's the best option for a system that addresses all of our design goals.

### Optimistic Rollups TL;DR

Optimism is an "Optimistic Rollup," which is basically just a fancy way of describing a blockchain that piggy-backs off of the security of another "parent" blockchain.
Specifically, Optimistic Rollups take advantage of the consensus mechanism (like PoW or PoS) of their parent chain instead of providing their own.
In Optimism's case this parent blockchain is Ethereum.

![op loves eth](../../assets/docs/how-optimism-works/1.png)

### Block storage

> Optimism blocks are published by sending a transaction to a special smart contract on Ethereum called the [`CanonicalTransactionChain`](https://etherscan.io/address/0x5E4e65926BA27467555EB562121fac00D24E9dD2) (or CTC for short).

Author: Add a few sentences about how Optimism blocks are identical in structure to Ethereum blocks

It's through this relationship that Optimism derives its security from Ethereum.

![op loves eth](../../assets/docs/how-optimism-works/2.png)

### Block production

Users can have their transactions added to the chain in one of two ways: by sending the transaction to a block producer (also called a "Sequencer") or by submitting their transactions directly to the `CanonicalTransactionChain`.

Block producers combine lots of transactions together and publish them all at once as a batch.
This significantly reduces overall transaction fees by spreading fixed costs over all of the transactions in a given batch.
Block producers also apply some basic compression techniques to minimize the amount of data published to Ethereum.
Only one block producer is active at any given time.
For the moment, [Optimism PBC](https://www.optimism.io/) runs the only block producer.
Refer to the below section about [Sequencer decentralization](#sequencer-decentralization) for more information.

![op loves eth](../../assets/docs/how-optimism-works/3.png)

Alternatively, users can skip block producers entirely and submit their transactions directly to the `CanonicalTransactionChain`.

> This is typically more expensive but has the advantage of being resistant to censorship by block producers.

Author: Add a sentence here about how this is the way that L1 contracts can send data to L2.

(diagram)

### Block execution

Optimism, like Ethereum, is a network of nodes.
Ethereum nodes download blocks from Ethereum's p2p network.
Optimism nodes instead download blocks directly from the `CanonicalTransactionChain` contract.
These blocks are then executed deterministically, just like any other blockchain.

(image)

Optimism nodes are made up of two primary components, the Ethereum data indexer and the Optimism client software.

> The Ethereum data indexer, also called the ["data transport layer"](https://github.com/ethereum-optimism/optimism/tree/develop/packages/data-transport-layer) (or DTL), pieces together the Optimism blockchain from blocks published to the `CanonicalTransactionChain` contract.

Reviewer: Can we update this to "the ["Data Transport Layer (DTL)](..."

Reviewer: maybe also "reconstructs the Optimism blockchain..."

(image)

> Once a block is indexed, the Optimism client software will pull this block in and execute it.

Reviewer: This sentence is not clear. 

Once a block is indexed by the DTL, the Optimism client software will take the indexed block and ???

 I am not sure I even understand this well enough to rephrase it. What is it executing? The already created and stored block from the DTL? And why is it executing it? To reconstruct state? To verify execution? It is not clear.

Optimism's client software is an *almost* completely vanilla version of [Geth](https://github.com/ethereum/go-ethereum), which means Optimism is close to identical to Ethereum under the hood.

> We refer to this architecture as ["EVM Equivalence"](https://medium.com/ethereum-optimism/introducing-evm-equivalence-5c2021deb306).

Author: Maybe add a sentence here about why we chose to do this and how it relates to our design principles

(insert node diagram)

> ### Deposits

Reviewer 2: Shouldn't the "Deposits" and Withdrawals" sections be renamed to something more generic e.g. "Transferring assets and data between the layers"?

Author: Yeah I think that's a good idea

Since users can create blocks on Optimism by triggering the `CanonicalTransactionChain` on Ethereum, it's very easy to send data from Ethereum to Optimism.

> User-created blocks can include arbitrary transaction data and will appear to originate from the address that generated the block.

Author: ```suggestion
User-created blocks can include transactions that will appear to originate from the address that generated the block.
```

> Contracts on Ethereum can use this feature to, for example, deposit some assets from Ethereum into Optimism.

Author: Can consider expanding on how this deposit would actually work

(diagram)

### Withdrawals

The process of sending data from Optimism back to Ethereum is somewhat more involved.

> In this direction, we need to be able to make provable statements about the state of Optimism to contracts sitting on Ethereum.

Author: > we need to be able to make provable statements about the state of Optimism

Should be explained better

Making provable statements about the state of Optimism requires a [cryptographic commitment](https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Commitment_scheme) in the form of the root of the Optimism's [state trie](https://medium.com/@eiki1212/ethereum-state-trie-architecture-explained-a30237009d4e).
Optimism's state is updated after each block, so this commitment will also change after every block.

> Commitments are regularly published to smart contract on Ethereum called the [`StateCommitmentChain`](https://etherscan.io/address/0xBe5dAb4A2e9cd0F27300dB4aB94BeE3A233AEB19).

Author: ```suggestion
Commitments are regularly published to a smart contract on Ethereum called the [`StateCommitmentChain`](https://etherscan.io/address/0xBe5dAb4A2e9cd0F27300dB4aB94BeE3A233AEB19).
```

(diagram)

Optimism users can challenge published state roots at any time during their "challenge window" (currently set to 7 days).
This triggers a multi-round process in which the challenger and the original publisher walk down a Merkle tree of the execution trace of the block that generated the resulting state root.
Eventually the two parties find the first execution step where both parties agree on the input but disagree on the output.
This single execution step is executed on Ethereum and the winner of the challenge is determined.

(diagram)

This process is guaranteed to always correctly determine whether or not the published state root is valid.
Bad state roots will always be invalidated as long as at least one user is willing to perform this challenge process.
Under the assumption that at least one such user exists, we can be certain that any state root that has passed its 7 day waiting period without being invalidated by a challenge must be valid.
Once we can be sure that a state root is valid, users can begin to use that state root to create Merkle proofs about the current state of Optimism.

## Roadmap

> 

Reviewer 2: We should link to the website roadmap here https://www.optimism.io/about

> ### Next gen fault proofs

Reviewer 2: We added a page about the Fault proofs here https://github.com/ethereum-optimism/community-hub/pull/326/files#diff-81969a92e6f452745c3e18d617323d2ea3c895b79e86a48d813b8e3f8ce64ac5  there is also a dedicated page about the sequencer in the protocol section of docs. I suggest we reference the website for high lever easy-to-digest roadmap reference and the protocol sections for more detailed references without reinventing this content.

By launching early, we were able to speed up the timeline of the new fault proof and ultimately bring a better experience to users and developers, faster.

This means that users of the Optimism network currently need to trust the Sequencer node (run by Optimism PBC) to publish valid state roots to Ethereum.
We're making fast progress on the upgrade fault proof mechanism and we expect to productionize our work within the first few months of 2022.
You can keep up with our progress on the [Cannon repository](https://github.com/ethereum-optimism/cannon/).

### Sequencer decentralization

Optimism PBC currently runs the only Optimism Sequencer node.
We're working hard to completely decentralize the Sequencer selection process so that anyone can participate in the network as a block producer.
Getting to full Sequencer decentralization is a challenging process that requires careful consideration.
In particular, we need to manage the impact of [Miner Extractable Value](https://ethereum.org/en/developers/docs/mev/) that Sequencer nodes have access to.

TODO: expand this section

> <!-- ## Why Optimistic Rollups?

Author: Everything below here is just scrap and stuff cut from previous iterations of this page

Before any code was written, Optimism was just a goal: *make Ethereum mainstream*.

We just needed to figure out exactly how to turn that lofty goal into a reality.
Constructing a new L1 system was out of the question.
Optimism was designed to scale Ethereum, not create a new chain that competes with it.
This left only two serious options: Optimistic Rollups or ZK Rollups.

### Simple

> ZK Rollups are extremely cool.

Reviewer: I have been asked about this a few times, not sure if this is the best spot for this but I would love to have a section about ZK rollups and our feelings towards them as they figure themselves out

Reviewer 2: I have added an FAQs section under "How Optimism works" where this might fit better.

Optimism is as close to Ethereum as possible not only for pragmatic reasons, but because Optimism exists so that Ethereum can succeed.
We hope that you can see the influence of this philosophy when looking at Optimism's design.

## System overview

We've covered most of the "why" behind Optimism.
Now it's time to explain the big idea that makes Optimism possible: the Optimistic Rollup.
We'll go through a brief explainer of *how* Optimistic Rollups work at a high level.
Then we'll explain *why* Optimism is built as an Optimistic Rollup and why we believe it's the best option for a system that addresses all of our design goals.

### Optimistic Rollups TL;DR

Optimism is an "Optimistic Rollup," which is basically just a fancy way of describing a blockchain that piggy-backs off of the security of another "parent" blockchain.
Specifically, Optimistic Rollups take advantage of the consensus mechanism (like PoW or PoS) of their parent chain instead of providing their own.
In Optimism's case this parent blockchain is Ethereum.

<div align="center">
<img width="400" src="../../assets/docs/how-optimism-works/1.png">
</div>

> ### Block storage

Reviewer 3: Similar to the comment made just below here, I see a need to clarify the relationship between blocks and transaction. TBH I myself don't typically think of transaction batches as blocks, though I can see now how that makes sense since EVM equivalence.

Optimism blocks are held within an append-only list inside of the CTC (we'll explain exactly how blocks are added to this list in the next section).
This append-only list forms the Optimism blockchain.

The `CanonicalTransactionChain` includes code that guarantees that the existing list of blocks cannot be modified by new Ethereum transactions.
However, this guarantee can be broken if the Ethereum blockchain itself is reorganized and the ordering of past Ethereum transactions is changed.
The Optimism mainnet is configured to be robust against block reorganizations of up to 50 Ethereum blocks.
If Ethereum experiences a reorg larger than this, Optimism will reorg as well.

Of course, it's a key security goal of Ethereum to not experience these sort of significant block reorganizations.
Optimism is therefore secure against large block reorganizations as long as the Ethereum consensus mechanism is too.
It's through this relationship (in part, at least) that Optimism derives its security properties from Ethereum.

<div align="center">
<img width="400" src="../../assets/docs/how-optimism-works/2.png">
</div>

### Block production

> Users can have their transactions added to the Optimism chain in one of two ways: by sending the transaction to a block producer (which we call a "Sequencer") or by submitting their transactions directly to the `CanonicalTransactionChain`.

Reviewer 3: I think it's worth clarifying why it makes sense to call the "Block Producer" a "Sequencer". ie. it's not immediately obvious that a major part of producing a block is choosing which tx to include and in what order.

Reviewer 2: I pulled some of the sequencer information you already had in the protocol specs to clarify this see this paragraph https://github.com/ethereum-optimism/community-hub/pull/325/files#diff-a2377cc33b3952a9fb6ec3d989f68cb9c0f1334fdc6956ec290d634c8d6c82a2R117

This means Optimism is close to identical to Ethereum under the hood.
In particular, Optimism shares the same [Ethereum Virtual Machine](https://ethereum.org/en/developers/docs/evm/), the same [account and state structure](https://ethereum.org/en/developers/docs/accounts/), and the same [gas metering mechanism and fee schedule](https://ethereum.org/en/developers/docs/gas/).
We refer to this architecture as ["EVM Equivalence"](https://medium.com/ethereum-optimism/introducing-evm-equivalence-5c2021deb306) and it means that most Ethereum tools (even the most complex ones) "just work" with Optimism.

The Optimism client software continuously monitors the DTL for newly indexed blocks.
When a new block is indexed, the client software will download it and execute the transactions included within it.
The process of executing a transaction on Optimism is the same as on Ethereum: we load the Optimism state, apply the transaction against that state, and then record the resulting state changes.
This process is then repeated for each new block indexed by the DTL.

(insert node diagram)

> ### Moving assets between layers

Reviewer 3: I think we should address address aliasing here. 
In particular it's useful to callout that the aliasing and de-aliasing occur in the contract layer, and geth just sets tx.origin/msg.sender based on logs emitted by the CTC.

(diagram)

Optimism users can challenge published state roots at any time during their "challenge window" (currently set to 7 days).
This triggers a multi-round process in which the challenger and the original publisher walk down a Merkle tree of the execution trace of the block that generated the resulting state root.
Eventually the two parties find the first execution step where both parties agree on the input but disagree on the output.
This single execution step is executed on Ethereum and the winner of the challenge is determined.

(diagram)

This process is guaranteed to always correctly determine whether or not the published state root is valid.
Bad state roots will always be invalidated as long as at least one user is willing to perform this challenge process.
Under the assumption that at least one such user exists, we can be certain that any state root that has passed its 7 day waiting period without being invalidated by a challenge must be valid.
Once we can be sure that a state root is valid, users can begin to use that state root to create Merkle proofs about the current state of Optimism.

## Roadmap

### Next gen fault proofs

> On November 11th, 2021, the Optimism protocol went through its biggest upgrade to date.

Reviewer 3: @elenadimitrova I believe this is the content you moved into #329 right?

Reviewer 2: I have moved the roadmap details from here to the Protocol specs holding page.
